We distinguish between two core phenomena: abstraction and executive control. Viewing modeling as a conversation in which individuals' mental models are being made explicit and merged into a shared mental model, guided by goals and interests and directed by executive skills allows us to decompose modeling into elementary processes pertaining to conversation structure, abstraction formation and executive processes. There appears to be a clustering of behavioral traits that lead to desirable modeling performance: the ability to formulate generic abstractions capturing the essence of a concept, switch flexibly between abstraction levels to good e ect, beable to structure a discussion, stay focused on the topic and scope, monitor bothone's own thoughts and contributions and the group's progress towards model-ing goals as a whole. On the other hand, participants who make more superficial abstractions, focusing rather on single properties of concepts and using them to represent the entire thing, also show less awareness of what is being discussed, deviate from focus more often, become more easily distracted and tend break their reasoning processes and sentences halfway through. Given that this appears to depend on the individual rather than the individual's background and training, it seems that individual differences may override background and experience, in any case when explicit training has not been given. We suspect that working memory (WM) capacity may play an important facilitating role in the formation
of abstractions. In summary, it boils down to making people consciously aware of a certain structure to aid their way of working, and implementing explicit markers to remind them to perform the necessary actions. The essential difference in abstraction formation quality does not appear to be so much whether or not a certain level of abstraction can be achieved, but rather how the abstractions are formed: people who form abstractions based on single properties can make high-level abstractions and still be corrected by their peers because some aspect of the object's behavior has been overlooked in this way. Those who make generative, holistic abstractions can make high-level abstractions which are good reflections of the essence of a certain concept in a given context. This difference appears to correlate with overall strength of executive functioning in individuals.